In addition to recording context for your data by
using the annotations function in Google Analytics,
you can also implement a feature called custom alerts
to help monitor your analytics for changes in your data.
Custom alerts are notifications that are triggered when certain data thresholds are
realized or trans identified based on conditions that you choose.
This provides a convenient automated method for you to be notified
when something happens in your data that might require your attention.
We're going to talk about what you need to know about
your own data to create effective alerts,
help you narrow down some metrics that might make
sense for you to monitor depending on your site,
and give you a sample set of alerts that you can work
from if you're really having a hard time getting started.
As you'll see, you can set up custom alerts for
almost any metric and dimension combination in Google Analytics,
and that can be a bit overwhelming.
Even though configuring these alerts is pretty straightforward,
it's best if you do a little bit of planning ahead of time.
For now, we're going to have you begin thinking about
some potential conditions that you'd want to be alerted for,
and we'll see if you can make a custom alert for exactly that.
Some examples for you to think about are;
what filter and metric combinations are important?
How big or small does the change need to be in order for it to be important to you?
Does this condition need to be checked or compared daily?
Weekly? Or monthly?
You're trying to get the ultimate combination of notifications you
need at the right interval to ensure that you can take action.
But before you get carried away setting up dozens of daily alerts,
let's talk a little bit about alert timing.
Many users mistakenly create too many and too frequent alerts especially daily ones,
based on a mistaken assumption that alerts are generated in real time,
that's not the case.
Custom alerts are typically generated and sent
at the end of the period in which the conditions were met,
not as soon as the conditions were met.
This is often much later than you would prefer to have
notification about any kind of critical failure.
Because of this, custom alerts do not provide and should not be considered an alternative
for real-time monitoring and
real-time notification for changes in mission-critical metrics.
The other thing that can happen if alerts are generating
too frequently is that their importance tends to fade,
and you may begin ignoring them which defeats
the whole reason you created them in the first place.